you know there's something about Jordan
ones when they're fresh out the box
I will sniff them like no other like
it's the best man in the world you know
I can relate to that
oh the Spike Lee's oh my lord I didn't
see him oh yeah classic absolute classic
this is like the closest well I'll ever
get to hold him I'm feeling $30,000 in
my hand
I've come to the birthplace of sneaker
culture to find out how they become such
a phenomenon
the snake industry has tripled in the
last 10 years it's now almost half of
global footwear sales I earn about 80
pairs myself and I'm not gonna lie I
still want more
but why there's two pockets of why shoes
are cool on one side they're really
functional they're comfortable to wear
they look cool they're an extension of
the individuality you can become
creative with them you can paint any
customizing you can own them right so
that's one pocket the other pocket is
that sneakers in and of themselves have
been placed in the same way that people
approach art we grew up with rules of
originality so the phrase was no biting
what does that mean so that means don't
talk like me don't dress like me don't
say what I say don't dance the way I
dance don't do anything like me
everything was about self-expression and
originality and one of the things that's
sad about today is kids pay more to look
the same now than we ever paid to be
different
in 1994 the sneaker industry was already
worth about two billion dollars by 2000
they had shot up to almost 14 billion
dollars and in the last 10 years it's
just exploded sneakers have taken over
the world the other thing that's really
taken off is collecting I mean serious
collecting sneaker brands are smart and
they know how to keep you buying more
and more shoes by putting out
limited-edition releases they create a
crazy demand a limited drop is likely to
cost more than a regular colorway right
out of the gate but things get really
crazy in the resale market resellers
will bog by Limited sneakers and sell
them on at a much higher price they can
end up costing thousands more than a
regular version of the same shoe
reselling has got so big the market is
worth about 6 billion dollars and it's
predicted to hit as much as seventeen
billion dollars in the next three years
there's a lot of money to be made I've
spent about 30 to 40 thousand pounds on
sneakers was that money well spent I
don't know it was my choice maybe if I
hadn't spent it on loads of sneakers I
could have got car bought flat but this
isn't just about me over a billion pairs
of sneakers are produced every year and
you can't produce that much of anything
without having an impact on the planet
as as sort of the industry evolved over
the years they weren't thinking as much
it seems about like well what's gonna
happen down the line yeah you know
eventually you know all the sneakers
have to go somewhere where is it gonna
go mostly right now it's gonna go to
landfills we we can't really do a lot
with it we can't really recycle a lot of
sneakers it's one of those things that
you know companies are working on now
according to Nike the average carbon
footprint of their products is over 7
kilograms about the same as a 10-mile
Drive so what does that mean for the
planet well it would take one tree
nearly two years to remove the carbon
dioxide from one pair of shoes with over
a billion sneaker sold every year that
tree would need 2 billion years to
offset their emissions
so I am literally just outside of Leeds
it's my first time it is freezing but
I'm meeting a young man named Caitlin
and he's very much in size customization
and restoration and he has a really good
point when it comes to talking about the
environment so I'm looking forward to it
hi Keenan
nice to meet you Linney thank you so
much I've actually got into trainers
just from watching football and the
process of obviously going to the
football he's wearing nice shoes I'll
just start it off from friends I'd have
started cleaning shoes and really died
in them and then it's all moved tight
this fully customized additional work if
I can restore nine pairs of shoes here
in my house and that's now my shoes I
have to go to a landfill and obviously
be a waste because obviously with the
toxins what's in this shoe and the globe
obviously it goes straight into the soil
the rubber don't degrade if everyone
could just think for a minute before
they're thinking right what's been these
shoes I mean I'm not saying come to my
business but I'm saying you can bring
your shoes to me and I can we start on
that's one my spare one Phil and I'm
happy with that
Keenan is just one of so many
customizers and refurbishes who are
started up in recent years it's
interesting because they seem closer to
the way things were back in a day with
making your sneakers lost I love the
idea of it you know just having a few
pairs that matter and customizing them
to keep them in shape rather than buying
new ones constantly do I need all the
sneakers I have probably not